[DOC-106] Add content for keyspaces and tables section (#18892)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/ycql-language/keyspaces-tables.md

---
title: Keyspaces and tables
linkTitle: Keyspaces and tables
description: Keyspaces and tables in YCQL
image: /images/section_icons/secure/create-roles.png
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: explore-ycql-language-features-keyspaces-tables
    parent: explore-ycql-language
    weight: 60
type: docs
---

This section explores the topics of Keyspaces and Tables in YCQL using the command line shell

> `ycqlsh`.

Reviewer: line 15 can be deleted as I have already included `ycqlsh` in the previous suggested change.

{{% explore-setup-single %}}

## YCQL shell

> Use the [ycqlsh shell](../../../admin/ycqlsh/) to interact with a Yugabyte database cluster using the [YCQL API](../../../api/ycql/). Because `ycqlsh` is derived from the Apache Cassandra shell `cqlsh` code base, most `cqlsh` commands work as is in `ycqlsh`. Unsupported commands are listed towards the end of this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [ycqlsh shell](../../../admin/ycqlsh/) to interact with a Yugabyte database cluster using the [YCQL API](../../../api/ycql/). Because `ycqlsh` is derived from the Apache Cassandra shell [cqlsh](https://cassandra.apache.org/doc/latest/cassandra/tools/cqlsh.html), most `cqlsh` commands work as is in `ycqlsh`. Unsupported commands are [listed](#unsupported-cqlsh-commands) at the end of this page.
```

Using `ycqlsh`, you can:

- interactively enter YCQL DDL and DML and see the query results
- input from a file or the command line
- use tab completion to automatically complete commands
- use a minimal command name as long as it can be distinguished from other commands (for example:

>   `desc` instead of `DESCRIBE`)

Reviewer: Delete line 29 - `desc` instead of `DESCRIBE`)

`ycqlsh` is installed with YugabyteDB and is located in the `bin` directory of the YugabyteDB home directory.

### Connect to a node

> From the YugabyteDB home directory, connect to any node of the database cluster as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From your YugabyteDB home directory, connect to any node of the database cluster as follows:
```

```sh
$ ./bin/ycqlsh 127.0.0.1
```

This should bring up the following prompt, which prints the version of `ycqlsh` being used.

```output
Connected to local cluster at 127.0.0.1:9042.
[ycqlsh 5.0.1 | Cassandra 3.9-SNAPSHOT | CQL spec 3.4.2 | Native protocol v4]
Use HELP for help.
ycqlsh>
```

## Users

> By default, YugabyteDB has one admin user already created: `cassandra` (the recommended user). You can check this as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, YugabyteDB has one admin user already created: `cassandra` (the recommended user), and you can check the existing user as follows:
```

```sql
ycqlsh> select * from system_auth.roles;
```

> This should output the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see an output similar to the following:
```

```output
 role      | can_login | is_superuser | member_of | salted_hash
-----------+-----------+--------------+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cassandra |      True |         True |          [] | $2a$12$64A8Vo0R3K9XeUp26CSzpuWtvUBwOiGFjPAbXGt7wsxZIScGrcsDu\x00\x00\x00\x00
```

## Keyspaces

YCQL supports keyspaces, much like Apache Cassandra, with one caveat. Keyspaces in Apache Cassandra

> specify the replication properties for all tables in that keyspace. Replication configuration is defined at the Universe level in YugabyteDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specify the replication properties for all tables in that keyspace. Replication configuration is defined at the [universe](../../../architecture/concepts/universe/) level in YugabyteDB.
```

To create a new keyspace `testdb`, run the following statement:

```sql
ycqlsh> CREATE KEYSPACE testdb;
```

> To list all keyspaces, use the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To list all keyspaces, use the following command:
```

```sql
ycqlsh> DESCRIBE KEYSPACES;
```

```output
system_schema  system_auth  testdb  system
```

> To use a specific keyspace, use the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a specific keyspace, use the following command:
```

```sql
ycqlsh> USE testdb;
```

You should see the following output:

```output
ycqlsh:testdb>
```

> To drop the keyspace we just created, use the `DROP` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To drop the keyspace you just created, use the `DROP` command as follows:
```

```sql
ycqlsh> DROP KEYSPACE testdb;
```

Verify the keyspace is no longer present as follows:

```sql
ycqlsh> DESCRIBE KEYSPACES;
```

```output
system_schema  system_auth  system
```

## Tables

Create a table using the CREATE TABLE statement.

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
  id UUID,
  username TEXT,
  enabled boolean,
  PRIMARY KEY (id)
  );
```

> To list all tables, use the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To list all tables, use the following command:
```

```sql
ycqlsh> DESCRIBE TABLES;
```

```output
ycqlsh:testdb> DESCRIBE TABLES;

users
```

To describe the table you created, enter the following:

```sql
ycqlsh> DESCRIBE TABLE users;
```

```output
ycqlsh:testdb> describe table users;

CREATE TABLE testdb.users (
    id uuid PRIMARY KEY,
    username text,
    enabled boolean
) WITH default_time_to_live = 0
    AND transactions = {'enabled': 'false'};
```

> Please note that due to architectural differences, YugabyteDB does not support most of the Apache Cassandra table level properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< note title="Note" >}}
Due to architectural differences, YugabyteDB does _not_ support most of the Apache Cassandra table level properties.
`default_time_to_live` is one of the supported properties and the `transactions` property is added by YugabyteDB. For more details, see [table properties](../../../api/ycql/ddl_create_table/#table-properties-1).
{{< /note >}}
```

Reviewer: Add it to a note box and delete the lines 158 and 159.

`ycqlsh` is installed with YugabyteDB and is located in the `bin` directory of the YugabyteDB home directory.

### Connect to a node

From your YugabyteDB home directory, connect to any node of the database cluster as follows:

```sh
$ ./bin/ycqlsh 127.0.0.1
```

This should bring up the following prompt, which prints the version of `ycqlsh` being used.

```output
Connected to local cluster at 127.0.0.1:9042.
[ycqlsh 5.0.1 | Cassandra 3.9-SNAPSHOT | CQL spec 3.4.2 | Native protocol v4]
Use HELP for help.
ycqlsh>
```

## Users

By default, YugabyteDB has one admin user already created: `cassandra` (the recommended user), and you can check the existing user as follows:

```sql
ycqlsh> select * from system_auth.roles;
```

You should see an output similar to the following:

```output
 role      | can_login | is_superuser | member_of | salted_hash
-----------+-----------+--------------+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 cassandra |      True |         True |          [] | $2a$12$64A8Vo0R3K9XeUp26CSzpuWtvUBwOiGFjPAbXGt7wsxZIScGrcsDu\x00\x00\x00\x00
```

## Keyspaces

> YCQL supports keyspaces, much like Apache Cassandra, with one caveat. Keyspaces in Apache Cassandra

Reviewer 2: - Could you explain the concept of Keyspaces tad more (like column families etc).

Author: Sure.

Author: Hows this?

> A keyspace is a container for a set of tables that belong together somehow. If multiple applications are using a single database, the tables belonging to each application can be grouped into a separate keyspace. In Apache Cassandra, replication configuration is done at the keyspace level. So, all tables that require the same replication configuration may be grouped into a keyspace. This pattern does not apply to YugabyteDB because in YugabyteDB replication configuration is done at the [universe](../../../architecture/concepts/universe/) level.

Reviewer 2: Looks good !!

> specify the replication properties for all tables in that keyspace. Replication configuration is defined at the [universe](../../../architecture/concepts/universe/) level in YugabyteDB.

Reviewer 2: - Slight rewording might be needed here : 
`replication properties for all tables in that keyspace.` and `Replication configuration is defined at the [universe] level`. One question came to my mind is what is the difference between Properties and Configuration

Author: Configuration is the "what" and the properties are the "how" but i think I should make them both the same, maybe configuration.

Author: This line is now modified into the above line.

Reviewer 2: LGTM

  id UUID,
  username TEXT,
  enabled boolean,
  PRIMARY KEY (id)
  );
```

To list all tables, use the following command:

```sql
ycqlsh> DESCRIBE TABLES;
```

```output
ycqlsh:testdb> DESCRIBE TABLES;

users
```

To describe the table you created, enter the following:

```sql
ycqlsh> DESCRIBE TABLE users;
```

```output
ycqlsh:testdb> describe table users;

CREATE TABLE testdb.users (
    id uuid PRIMARY KEY,
    username text,
    enabled boolean
) WITH default_time_to_live = 0
    AND transactions = {'enabled': 'false'};
```

{{< note title="Note" >}}
Due to architectural differences, YugabyteDB does _not_ support most of the Apache Cassandra table level properties.
`default_time_to_live` is one of the supported properties and the `transactions` property is added by YugabyteDB. For more details, see [table properties](../../../api/ycql/ddl_create_table/#table-properties-1).
{{< /note >}}
`default_time_to_live` is one of the supported properties. YugabyteDB adds the
`transactions` property. See [table properties](/preview/api/ycql/ddl_create_table/#table-properties-1) for more details.

## Quit ycqlsh

To quit the shell, enter the following command:

```sql
ycqlsh> quit;
```

> ## Unsupported `cqlsh` commands

Reviewer 2: Should we add this to the Cassandra Compatibility page too ?

Author: Hmmm not sure. I think these are probably too detailed and don't affect anything in an application. Probably leave it as is.

|   Command         |                      Alternative                          |
| :---------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------- |
| LIST ROLES        | select * from system_auth.roles                           |
| SHOW SESSION      | Tracing from `ycqlsh` is not supported.                   |
| TRACING           | Tracing from `ycqlsh` is not supported.                   |

> {.sno-1}

Reviewer 2: Could we add a "Learn More" section to point the user to other pages?

Author: Which other pages?

Reviewer 2: Like Create Keyspace/ Create table API pages ?
